---
layout: post
title: "What I wish I could tell my younger self, a decade ago - career advice for incoming college freshmen"
date: 2021-04-14 23:05:00 -0400
categories: post introspection advice
---

Am I old enough yet to rattle off the tired refrain that time passes more quickly as you get older? In about a month, it will be ten years since I graduated from high school. It still doesn't really compute. The last three years of college, especially, still feel reasonably close. Yet here I am, after all of my 28 years, complaining about being old.

Recently, there have been a lot of posts on [/r/IndianaUniversity](https://reddit.com/r/IndianaUniversity/) from prospective students or incoming freshmen, asking advice on a variety of topics ranging from living arrangements to careers. And I've been thinking about what I was like when I was a an incoming IU freshman. Adept at navigating academic systems, I thought quite a lot of myself, but had little experience living in our messy reality where there isn't a simple measuring stick for success like a GPA.

Over the last few years, from about November 2018, I've been in a position with my company, Encamp, where I have some say in the hiring process. I've led or sat in on maybe twenty interviews at this point, mostly for "engineers" (aka software engineers, aka software developers, aka programmers - perhaps I'll wite a post sometime about the semantics of some of these terms and what kind of qualifications and job descriptions they imply). And while that's certainly not a lot of experience compared to some, it's worlds more than I had before, and it's given me a different perspective on what perhaps my priorities should have been in college. I've also seen the career advancement of my beloved sister, who's a few years older than me, but more or less entered the job market at the same time because she earned a Master's degree.

Anyway, let's get to it.

# 1. No one is going to tell you what to do with your life after college

College is a big step up from high school in terms of setting your own goals and picking your own path to achieve them. There are hundreds of majors, dozens of kinds of co-curriculars (including a sort near and dear to my own heart, [High Impact Educational Practices](https://www.aacu.org/node/4084)), athletics, social events, elective classes, and on and on. But still -- for the vast majority of these, you're selecting from a menu that others have created and curated. Like "desire paths," the shortcuts between the sidewalks on the quad that have long since been trodden into dirt tracks, you can pretty much bet that anything you might want to do in college has been done before, and enough times that you don't have to work too hard to figure out the "rubric" of what it will take to do it successfully yourself. The DOING may be hard, but knowing WHAT to do is easy.

When you enter the real world, you no longer have that externally-provided (or -imposed) structure on which you can strategically base your decisions. Sure, you typically know what it takes to succeed in your job - but to what end? Are you looking to earn more money? Have more control over your own work, or broader company initiatives? Do you want to go into management, or remain in more of an "individual contributor" role? Do you even actually _want_ any of the advancement opportunities available to you at your current company, or are you eyeing greener pastures elswhere? What about personal goals - a family, a house, hobbies, a home in a particular climate, geography, or size of city? Do you want to establish a place in a community or see the world? Obviously many combinations of preferences across the above domains are possible, and many are going to bring your various priorities into conflict.

I guess I've implied I have some advice worth sharing on these matters, so here it is: start making the transition to setting your own goals and achieving them your own way in college. You probably don't need a triple major. You probably don't need a double minor. In fact -- and this may come as a shock to you extrinsically-motivated "high academic achievers" - all you need is a bachelor's degree with a single major. By all means, pick up an extra major or minor along the way if it's convenient - but the further out from school you get, the less any of the actual words on your degree are going to matter. Get the diploma, because it's an essential signal in the job market that saves your resumé from getting bumped to second-tier or dumped straight into the bin. But also maybe take some electives that you just want to take because they're interesting. Try a club that sounds fun, whether or not it looks good on your resumé. A huge virtue of the giant smorgasbord of pre-trodden paths laid out at your feet is that it's quite easy to dip your toes in somewhere, and a professor, advisor, upperclassman, grad student, or post-doc will hold your hand through the initial confusion that inevitably comes with starting something new. That's tougher to find in the real world; capitalize on it now.

Don't take this as me saying you should eschew all the pre-trodden paths. By all means, shoot for a first job that is stable, "boring," well-paid, and in a sector with which your college has good industry relationships and for which it has good resources. This will let you find your feet both financially and in general as an independent adult for a couple of years, and it is a tried-and-true strategy. But don't wait around for someone to tell you what's next, because the moment you graduate, you've pretty much reached the end of the universal, extrinsically-defined milestones, and if you don't take some time to reflect and set your own, you might find that you're achieving someone else's dream.

# 2. Communication is key

The first section was focused on career advice, so let's start this point there as well. Every time I have had the opportunity to sit on a hiring panel, or have interacted with someone shortly after they started at Encamp, and thought to myself that they were a bad communicator, they did not last long with the company. A lack of baseline communication skills will get a veto from me no matter what the candidate's resumé looks like.

So what are good communication skills?

First, buzzwords, "big words," and rhetorical cleverness are worth little unless there's an underlying message that's actually worth hearing -- and if you have such a point to make, dressing it up with fanciness isn't going to win you all that many additional points from the kind of people you actually want to win points from. You may big yourself up in the eyes of some less-insightful folks with these kinds of verbal displays - and if you're climbing the corporate ladder and find that your higher-ups respond to this sort of thing, by all means, employ it. But at some point, you're going to need something actually useful to say, and the more concise and broadly-understandable it is, usually the better.

This holds true in personal relationships as well. "Spitting game" and always "winning" conversations isn't going to get you very far. I mean, if you're just interested in serial, shallow Tinder relationships, go for it. Getting that kind of experience can be valuable too, and frankly I wish I'd put myself out there a little more in that domain. But when it comes to friends, colleagues, and deeper romantic relationships, the rules are different. I found very early on in college that you can spot the "fake" people in about 7 seconds -- I called them "ladder climbers." They're looking for the right thing to say that will advance their social standing in your eyes (and in the eyes of anyone they meet). Don't be that guy.

So how do you have a good conversation? The answer is really going to astound you here... _listen to the other person_. We're going to take a digression to talk about "active listening."

Active listening means you are paying attention to what the other person is saying. You are thinking about what it means to them, about what they are implying or what they might say next. You are attempting to actively unpack and internalize the message they are trying to get across to you, and you are letting them be an active participant in determining the direction of the conversation. You are _not_ just waiting for your turn to speak. You are _not_ interrupting them. You are _not_ jumping on every opportunity to show off. You are _not_ putting words in their mouth -- taking every brief pause on their part to insert your own ending to their thought that serves you. If you don't understand something they said, ask them about it!

That being said, you're not letting them completely control the conversation either. Your goal should be to find something to talk about that you _both_ legitimately find valuable -- interesting and deep, or lighthearted and humorous, or any other axis you might judge value on. A conversational rule of thumb -- certainly not one I came up with, you've no doubt heard this a million times -- the person asking the questions is in control of the conversation. If you're asking all the questions, your conversational partner will feel like they're being interrogated, even if you're just trying to find the aforementioned common ground. So share a bit about yourself as well -- give them the opportunity to ask you some questions.

And above all, cultivate your sense of other people's comfort and interest level -- your "EQ" or emotional intelligence. You've heard the phrase "read the room." If they're not asking you questions despite your attempts to leave openings for them to do so; if they're answering yours with short, rote replies; or if they're just not holding up their end of the conversation as an active listener, politely excuse yourself. A simple "Listen, it was nice talking with you, but I'm going to mingle a bit and stop monopolizing your time!" (said in words that sound believable coming out of your mouth) can be a lifesaver at "networking" type events.

Oh, and a trick I use to remember people's names - after the first introductions and couple of sentences, ask them their name again, and once they confirm it (or correct you!) repeat it another time or two quickly ("Hey, just so I don't feel silly later, let me confirm your name again - Sam, right?" "Yeah!" "Ok awesome Sam! I'm Daniel. Anyway, as I was/you were saying..."). I've found that if I say someone's name out loud about three times in that first conversation, it will stick pretty well (your mileage may vary). But don't say their name in every sentence, Dale Carnegie be damned. Everyone knows that trick by now and it makes you sound like you're trying to sell them something.

# 3. Develop your information technology skills

You might have noticed that computers abound in modern life. When I graduated high school, my education policymakers hadn't. Listen, I was one of the nerds who _liked_ chemistry, physics, and calculus in high school, dedicating two full years to each of them. And though the tired complaint "I'm never going to use this again after this class" never passed my lips... perhaps it should have. My high school had an option to take AP Computer Science, which I did not take advantage of, and had a couple of lower-level electives in the domain, which I also did not take. As I said earlier, I was adept at navigating academic systems, and I identified the path of least resistance within my high school's curriculum and followed it, and computer skills simply were not a core part of that curriculum.

Maybe you are luckier than me -- maybe you come from a state or school district with priorities more in line with our modern era. Or maybe in the last ten years things have changed more broadly. But if you're not already coming in to college with a solid background in working with computers, do yourself a favor and develop those skills now.

First, you'd better be able to type with all ten fingers. You don't need to be a perfect touch-typist, never looking down at the keyboard. But if you're still hunting-and-pecking, fix that now. There are plenty of free online resources. Maybe that advice is archaic, but that's the boat I was in upon graduating high school, and it really didn't take that long to develop the skill in that summer after high school; I'd just never bothered to make myself do it before.

Next, anyone who knows the secret to fixing any problem with a computer should be happy to share it with you: just do a web search. That's all we "experts" do, we just happen to know some jargon terms that make our queries more successful -- but you can learn those too. Oh, and "turn it off an back on again" is literally the first thing you should always try. It works surprisingly often.

Finally, perhaps more relevant advice to those at the particular juncture of life to which this post is ostensibly addressed: take some introductory computer science courses in college if you didn't get a chance in high school. Symbolic logic will teach you how to "think like a computer" which is absolutely invaluable. Perhaps my most radical (and only) stance on education policy is that we should start teaching basic symbolic logic and set theory in _elementary_ school. Drop long division if you need to remove something to make room.

But back to college -- you don't need to get a computer science major or minor, though if you find you like the classes, go for it. But any amount of time and effort you invest in increasing your computer literacy will pay dividends in almost any sector of the economy. Learning the fundamentals like symbolic logic, up through basic and perhaps intermediate programming, will only pay greater dividends over time as the march of digital technology in our society continues. As more labor is automated, the people who understand how to create, maintain, and best make use of those systems are going to stay valuable.

However, people who focus on computer science alone, it turns out, aren't always that useful when they collide with "real world" problems, and sometimes display an astonishing lack of self-awareness of their own limitations. You need to understand how something actually, really works before you go slapping computers and automation in it. So don't push yourself through classes you dislike or do poorly in out of a misguided sense that computer science is the be-all/end-all. Some of the most valuable people to a modern organization are those who have deep expertise relating to the core mission -- say, international refugee policy and its history -- _and_ who have a basic grasp of computer fundamentals. If you speak a common language with your organization's IT team, you don't need to be an expert in IT, because you can make reasonable requests, framed in a language they understand, that will enable them to produce the outcome you actually want.

So get yourself tech-literate. It's never too late to start, but it will also never be easier than college. If you like it, dive deeper. If not, stop taking the classes - just don't underestimate the value you've derived from them along the way, when you "get" why a computer system works the way it does, and your colleagues are arguing with IT about "why can't there just be a button that does X?"
