---
layout: post
title: "What I wish I could tell my younger self, a decade ago - advice for personal relationships"
date: 2021-04-17 12:05:00 -0400
categories: post introspection advice
---

This is a spin-off from my previous post. I realized I was starting to get a bit long-winded, so I split out the advice on communication in personal relationships into its own post. That means I'm not going to go back over the advice I gave on communication in that post, which _absolutely_ still applies in personal relationships. Listening, listening, listening!

However, that last post, after spinning this part out from it, ended up sounding a bit like I thought that the extent to which you were going to be involved in personal conversations in college revolved heavily on how many networking events you went to or something. It was focused on how to navigate a first conversation.

Well, the better you know someone, the less you'll need to worry about some of those "first conversation" concerns. For example, finishing someone's sentences when you're really vibing can deepen a connection, but if you're not at that level yet, even a couple such interruptions can absolutely _kill_ the vibe, so use with caution. Plus everyone's tolerance for it is different, and differs depending on the context. Your girlfriend telling you about how her resident discussion-section douchebag mansplains everything does _not_ want you to finish her sentences in that particular conversation.

I'll reiterate this just once more -- listening skills will remain THE most important part of maintaining a good relationship at any level. There's another level that really comes into play with personal relationships, but doesn't so much in "professional" contexts.

I don't think I need to stress the importance of honesty in any relationship. If you don't already at least acknowledge the importance of honesty, you might be a lost cause. But honesty has different shades to it, and I think the primary distinction to be drawn between more personal and more professional relationships is around so-called "lies of omission."

What counts as a "lie of omission?"

I have a long and very boring half-story, half-lecture around the what and the why of my first, and currently only, tattoo (look forward to a _riveting_ post about it some day). I don't tell it to strangers or passing acquaintances lest they regret they asked; I have a much shortened bit on the "what" and leave it at that unless they ask further. But this is something I have permanently emblazoned in a very visible spot on my right forearm. When a friend asks, I try to give them as complete a picture as time and their patience will allow. It's a way of opening up to them and showing a little vulnerability, letting them into my world, and showing them that I value them enough to do so. If I don't seem willing to divulge the whole story, or constantly apologize for it, or make them keep needling me with questions to get it out of me, it's going to create cognitive dissonance in their mind. "If he got it in such a visible place, why doesn't he want to talk about it?" And, you know, maybe after I've given them the whole story, it will turn out they didn't find it that compelling. But they know a little more about me, even if that takeaway is just "he's a _huge_ nerd." And they know I'm willing to be honest with them, even if the content of what I'm telling them is not necessarily going to "advance" the relationship in and of itself.

Giving incomplete answers to questions is a pretty straightforward category of lies of omission, and it's a dial you can adjust depending on the context and the strength of the relationship. The server at the restaurant who comments on you tattoo? Does _not_ need the full story. But someone close to you, even if you think they won't find what you have to say that interesting on a topic, will pick up on the fact that you value their question enough to actually share instead of brushing them off.

Another category of "lies of omission" is when you want something, and you don't tell someone. I mean, have some tact. But if your needs and wants are going unmet in a relationship (romantic or otherwise) because the other person hasn't managed to magically guess them, it's YOU who is doing something wrong. This kind of behavior is stereotyped as a "female" thing -- think "playing hard to get" -- but men do it too all the time.

There is a stereotypically "male" lie of omission as well: when something is happening that you don't like, and you don't speak up. Sometimes men (and women) behave as if admitting unhappiness shows weakness and is therefore unacceptable; or they're afraid of hurting another person in some way, so they decide to "protect" them and keep the burden to themselves.

No one is ever going to advocate for you better than you could for yourself. I say "could" because you obviously _can_ abdicate this responsibility and rely on friends or partners to do it for you. I mean, maybe you're not the assertive type, and someone dear to you is much more gregarious. Guess what - you at least need to tell _them_ what you want and what you don't.

My first four serious relationships -- which is, uh... all of them, up until I met my wife -- had problems stemming from my poor communication related to these "lies of omission."

In a few cases, I was afraid to voice that I felt there was a problem in the relationship until far too late. Maybe we could have changed some things much earlier before they got to the point of breaking us up; or maybe we could have just broken up a lot earlier and saved ourselves a couple of months of frustration. But a drawn-out, unsatisfying final chapter of a relationship that finally snaps is not what anyone wanted. And boy did I flub up the actual breakup a couple of times. That is definitely a place where you don't need to tell the person every little thing -- but you need to be absolutely clear about the finality of the decision. First of all, it's the kind thing to do to give the other person some closure. And second, it will make your life better. You really don't want to have to break up with someone a second time because you were too wishy-washy on the first one.

One of my college romances was _really_ wrecked by poor communication, killed before it got off the ground. At the time, and still to this day, I felt like I was in a poorly-written TV show, complete with a love triangle where a friend and I were both interested in the same woman. It was _entirely_ preventable had I simply told the friend when I noticed him flirting (or at any point before), "Hey, listen, I've actually been interested in her, I think she might be interested in me -- do you think you could do me a huge favor and be my wingman here since you obviously get along too?" Poor communication continued for weeks amidst all three parties -- but mostly me -- and it damaged all of our relationships with each other. I'd like to think we've repaired them now, and I count both of the other people involved as friends today. That didn't happen without a few painful, honest conversations, and a few external factors that forced us to remain in each others' lives to some extent. 

It's tough, but you've got to tell the people in your life when something is _not_ working for you. Otherwise it will get worse, or at least continue to fester until it explodes, or maybe you'll just be unhappy forever. Don't do that to yourself!

In my last post, I told you to listen. In this one, I've told you to be honest. Truly groundbreaking, I know. But there's a reason those two suggestions are the perennial advice to building more fulfilling relationships at all levels. 18-year-old me had at least five more years to go before arriving at roughly the place I am now when it comes to honesty. Maybe I had to learn things for myself by putting my hand on the metaphorical stove... but maybe I could have saved myself some pain if I'd read a post like this before all that. Save your fingers, people.