Book report: Zen and The Art of Motorcycle Maintenance

Point 1: I disagree with the book's premise. Or anyway, I am not convinced by it.

The original sin that bothered Phaedrus so much - this infinite expansion of hypotheses produced by rationality, therefore seeming to make the quest for truth more difficult rather than less - well, that's just never been true in my experience. Infinite is a strong word, buddy.

I think maybe there is something like an infinity of hypotheses for any given problem. But it's like Zeno's paradox - each successive hypothesis starts to get more ridiculous and more unlikely than the last, so ultimately you're left with a finite probability distribution over probably hypotheses - a Bayesian prior that doesn't assign _precisely_ zero probability to anything - so, yeah, there are infinite hypotheses - but it does assign a probability so close to zero to all but a few hypotheses, that we can pretty successfully ignore them.

I work with computers for a living. A lot of that work is very similar to the process Pirsig describes with analyzing what's wrong with a motorcycle, (insert passage from book about the battery and headlight thing).

When debugging computer programs, or its larger cousin, troubleshooting software and hardware issues outside the bounds of your own code, the process is much the same. But back to my prior point - I'm never tempted to say there are infinite hypotheses about the problem. I usually have one or two hypotheses at first, and if neither pan out, one or two more, then maybe one more after that, and then I'm pretty much out of ideas, and it's time to try a completely different tactic to gather more information - because clearly I'm missing some crucial piece, or not weighting it highly enough. Ok, 5 is just a number I pulled out of my ass, but mathematically speaking, literally any finite number is approximately one infinity less than infinity. Could I come up with 50 hypotheses? Absolutely not. At some point working with software, you end up at "a cosmic ray flipped a bit somewhere" or "there are sharks chewing on the undersea internet cables again" and that's about rock-bottom.

Now, that doesn't mean I dislike the book, or disagree with most of what he says in it. I very much agree that there is a strange split between the analytical mode of thinking, and the esthetic mode. You can never quite _explain_ why something is beautiful (or has Quality, to use the book's word). Like pornography, you know it when you see it.

As a cognitive scientist with some education in neuroscience and philosophy, do I think that Laplace's demon could look at a brain and completely pick apart why a person thinks a given thing has Quality? Do I think it's _fundamentally_ impossible to analyze something and derive any progress towards the goal of understanding what gives it its Quality? No. But for one thing, even on the scale of a single brain, you need more than Laplace's demon, actually - the particle physics ultimately hold all the information, but their explanatory power is completely worthless if you need to be a god to make use of it, because it's 10^50 bits of information or whatever. So you need an understanding of the interactions that lets you group things together, not just split them apart with your analytical knife. Grouping together all the atoms into neurons isn't enough, either, because there's still a hundred billion of them, with their thousand trillion connections. Good luck with that.

Another problem you run into with understanding Quality is that everyone's perception of it is different. Sometimes quite different. True, it does seem like everybody draws a distinction between things that have it and things that don't (and many more gradations in between). But these judgments can vary, and tend to vary a lot more the more divergence there is between two observers' cultural background and life experience.

I guess I'm saying that Quality is in the brain of the beholder. I don't think that's controversial.

My wife dislikes ginger. She has probably eaten more ginger in her life than me, but it came concentrated within a much shorter span; she spent time living in rural Asia, and apparently on at least one too many occasions, had a meal that was just stir-fried ginger over rice. She developed an aversion to it that persists to this day, over half a decade later - though she does report that it seems to be slightly lessening, and perhaps by that decade's end she'll be able to enjoy a dish in which ginger plays a small part.

Now let's go to the fanciest Michelin star restaurant in the world and eat a dish that heavily emphasizes ginger. perhaps ninety-nine out of one hundred patrons agree it is of highest Quality, and my wife is the hundredth. That doesn't make her wrong. You can't be wrong when it comes to Quality judgments. And Phaedrus knew this too.

When he first introduced his students to the idea, he shows them two anonymous passages from past students' essays, and gets a 28-to-2 vote on which is better; when he expands this exercise and has students ranking four passages, he's averaging their ranks before comparing them with his own. He understands that Quality is intensely personal - continually stating that his goal in doing all this is to get the students to think for themselves about what is good and what is bad, rather than just mimicking the shallow techniques of past writers. But he also understands that to communicate with others about Quality presupposes a shared understanding of which things have it, and that everyone is not going to have quite exactly the same understanding. The important thing to him is that everyone can make the distinction -- therefore Quality, as some platonic ideal, I suppose, exists.

It's kind of the same way a species exists. There is no population of living things that shares identical genetics, phenotype, and developmental journey. At least if you define "population" to contain more than a single individual, which I think you have to. We can still meaningfully talk about species, though, because there are a whole lot of living things that, when you put them in a group with other living things, share an awful lot of similarities. One important factor to the definition is the ability to interbreed with other members of the species to produce similarly fertile offspring... well, at least for species that reproduce sexually. And not with species members of the same sex. Unless they're hermaphroditic like sea slugs. Or can change their sex based on environmental signals like zebrafish. Oh and by the way, some different species can interbreed and produce fertile offspring, like the American Bison and domestic cow, which produce the gloriously-named [Beefalo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beefalo).

I guess what I'm saying is that the world is complex. There are no simple answers. And our brains are complex, literally replicating and adjusting to the complexity of their world. And I'm beginning to think that I might propose that the opposite of Phaedrus's strict rule-following, hierarchical analysis is complexity, which emerges out of... well, even smaller analytically-sliced pieces that are just as strictly rule-following.

In other words, I think complexity science may hold some answers that Robert Pirsig would find interesting, if not quite satisfactory. This is a science still in its infancy, and may well remain there until we can either augment our brains or develop Artificial General Intelligence, and then who's going to bother reading _Zen_ when there's a whole universe to explore?

I think they should. It's a Quality book.